Previously...
North Carolina offers
wealth and prosperity
for those willing to persevere.
10,000 acres of his majesty's
land at your disposal.
- You'll marry me?
- Yes.
How much money
do you want for it?
Well, perhaps you could earn it.
Get off me!
I have no choice but to live
with what you've done to me.
While you rot in the ground,
I will raise my child
to be nothing like you.
Brianna was attacked.
Knowing it might be Bonnet's
child that she bears,
can you go back to her?
You're here.
I love you.
The corruption
of the governor's sheriffs
and tax collectors must end.
Your first mission
is to hunt down
and kill the fugitive...
Murtagh Fitzgibbons.
♪
She's gone.
I swore an oath Jamie Fraser,
when you were no more
than a week old
and only a lad
at your mother's breast.
I knelt at Ellen's feet,
as I now kneel by yours,
and I swore to her
by the name
of the threefold God that...
I'd follow you always
to do your bidding
and guard yer back
when you became a man grown
and was needing such service.
She's gone now.
But I'll always be with you.
Always.
♪
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say, could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
♪ Merry of soul ♪
♪ She sailed on a day ♪
♪ Over the sea ♪
♪ To Skye ♪
♪ Billow and breeze ♪
♪ Islands and seas ♪
♪ Mountains of rain and sun ♪
♪ All that was good ♪
♪ All that was fair ♪
♪ All that was me ♪
♪ Is gone ♪
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say, could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
♪ Merry of soul ♪
♪ She sailed on a day ♪
♪ Over the sea ♪
♪ To Skye ♪
♪
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say, could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪♪♪
Careful, or ye'll lose yer head.
Here.
It's not called
a cutthroat razor for nothin'.
We canna have ye
lookin' like ye've been
to the war and back,
not today anyway.
All right.
Here.
Heh. Nervous?
About what,
the day ye has in store for me,
or that you have a blade
to my throat?
Heh.
But for you, a day off from...
working on the house, at least?
Yeah, first in a wee while.
But we have a floor
under our feet now and a...
a roof above our heads.
Couldna have done it wi'out
the help of some of the men.
Bree and I cannot
thank you enough
for the gift of this cabin.
Couldna have my wee grandson
sleeping in the woods now,
could we?
I was thinking of adding a loft.
Bree said she'd draw up some...
plans for me to follow. And...
So...
Yeah.
Have ye the right tools?
Well, they say
it's a bad tradesman
who blames his tools
for his lack of... skills.
Oh.
No, I don't suppose
I've done much building,
or farming, for that matter.
Nor do I know
how to drive a horse
or gut a deer
or wield a sword, but, uh...
But I'm sure I'll find
a suitable trade
to provide for my family.
And until that time,
ye'll have to rely
on the skills and trades
of others.
Here.
The ring ye asked Murtagh
to make for Bree.
Thank you.
Oh, I thought perhaps...
I only expected
copper and brass.
Well...
this one is certainly fit
for my daughter.
Hmm?
Home is the place,
a site on which we live,
but Fraser's Ridge
is much more than that,
a community built
by the people who live there.
Once Jamie and I had chosen
a spot for a new home,
with the help of the settlers,
construction began.
Men and women
who made us feel at home
before the walls
of our new house
had even gone up,
who stood by us
as the seasons came and went,
who looked forward to reaping
the first harvest with us
and to sharing
in our daughter's wedding,
even if we hadn't quite
finished the house in time.
We were making our mark
on the land,
laying our foundations
for the rest of our lives.
That's not quite the white satin
and orange blossom I imagined.
Hmm.
No.
It's even more beautiful.
Now, I didn't have my mother
at either of my weddings.
I've dreamt of this day
for so long.
Helping you into your dress.
Doing your hair.
Mama, I'm here with you
and with the man I love.
It couldn't be more perfect.
Right.
I better go see
where your father's gone to.
It's almost time.
My baby.
♪
Old.
Ha.
New.
Borrowed.
And blue, huh.
Yeah, blue enough.
Huh.
Jamie?
In here.
Wait till you see her.
You've been busy.
I must do what I can for her,
while I have the chance.
We've no' had
enough time together.
It was going to happen one day.
And we're giving her away
to a man who loves her.
Oh.
What?
You doubt his love?
Did he no' doubt it himself?
Well, he's here now,
and he loves her.
Hmm.
Mebbe that's what I fear.
I ken what love
can make a man do.
Gives ye courage,
but not the sense
to go along wi' it.
And no good love'll
do either of them
if he gets himself killed.
He's a scholar.
I'm not sure
his area of expertise
covers the dangers
of the Carolina wilderness.
Hmm.
S'pose no amount of time
will prepare him.
Perhaps not.
But he has you to teach him.
Hmm.
♪
It's time?
You remembered.
Something old, something new,
something borrowed,
something blue,
and a silver sixpence...
For your shoe.
From Murtagh.
I am sorry
he can't be here today.
As is he.
I, uh, I'm glad
you brought these back with ye.
Hoped that maybe
you would wear them one day.
Bonnie.
I, uh, dinna imagine it's...
quite the wedding
ye maybe dreamt of
when you were a wee lass.
Hmm, not quite.
But, the best thing,
I don't have to imagine you.
It is a blessing you came to me.
But having just gotten ye back,
must I give ye away so soon?
Dad.
No matter where I am,
I will always be your wee girl.
♪
You ready, a leannan?
Je suis prest.
♪
You look radiant.
The Frasers of the Ridge
are here!
♪
It'll all be fine.
Remember,
the two of you together
can conquer the world.
♪
You... just...
I love you too.
Dearly beloved,
we are assembled here today
in the presence of God.
Let us therefore
reverently remember
that God has established
and sanctified marriage
for the welfare and happiness
of mankind.
I charge you both before God
that if either of you know
of any reason
why ye may lawfully not be
joined together in marriage,
ye do confess it now.
Roger Jeremiah,
wilt thou have this woman
to be thy wife,
and wilt thou pledge
thy troth to her,
in all love and honor,
in all duty and service,
in all faith and tenderness,
to live with her and cherish her
according to the ordinance
of God
in the holy bond of marriage?
I will.
Brianna Ellen,
for ye be well assured...
Brave face, darling.
'Tis brave as I can muster
given that it's not in Latin
and conducted
by a Catholic priest.
Duty and service
in all faith and tenderness,
to live with him and cherish him
according to
the ordinance of God
in the holy bond of marriage?
I will.
Who giveth this woman
to be married to this man?
I do.
I, Roger Jeremiah,
take thee, Brianna Ellen,
to be my wedded wife,
to have and to hold
from this day forward
in plenty and want,
in joy and in sorrow,
in sickness and in health
as long as we both shall live.
I, Brianna Ellen,
take thee, Roger Jeremiah,
to be my wedded husband,
to have and to hold
from this day forward...
To have and to hold
from this day forth,
for better for worse,
for richer for poorer.
In sickness and in health.
♪
In sickness and in health
as long as we both shall live.
As long as we both shall live.
♪
Thank you for coming.
Congratulations.
Thank you.
♪
Your Excellency.
Heartfelt congratulations
to you.
If we kenned you were coming,
we might have been better
prepared to accommodate you,
offered you a chamber
in the house.
Oh, no, tensions are
where they should be today,
when, in fact,
his Majesty has equipped me
with pavilion tents to rival
some of the best houses
in the Province.
And with my house unfinished,
I'm relieved to hear it.
Come.
Ceremony fit for a prince
in the days of yore.
I expect you'll be planning
a hunt in celebration?
- The groom's not much
for hunting.
- Oh.
He sings like a bird,
but not one for shooting them.
Oh.
Oh, um, I have a man with me,
Lieutenant Knox.
Well, it's a platoon,
to be precise.
Hope your men enjoy themselves.
Well, it's business
that brings them here,
not pleasure, unfortunately.
- Here?
- Hmm.
To the backcountry, you mean?
All manner of things
can grow from fallow soil,
as you've intimated
in your letters,
and, uh, there certainly seems
to be an abundance
of that out here.
Enough to keep a good number
of men busy, including myself.
But I ask you, is the man
who delays paying his landlord
more or less of a thief
than, say,
the letter writer
who is parsimonious
with his words?
When I write, Your Excellency,
I aim to provide simple facts.
But I can't help
but feel myself robbed
of the satisfaction
of seeing one particular story
being brought to its conclusion.
Your dispatches
have kept me enthralled
these past few months,
but a few too many twists
and turns of plot for my taste.
You know, I like to see
a villain get his comeuppance.
But I'm keeping you
from your guests.
Mm.
♪
Congratulations, Uncle Roger.
Aww.
Look at you.
Don't touch my hair.
Germain, ye daft thing, why not?
Grand-Père says you have ticks.
Ticks?
Oui.
Says all Presbyterians
have hair ticks.
Right.
Off you go.
Go play.
To the bride and groom.
So your father
thinks I'm heretic.
Oh, it's not just you.
He thinks all Presbyterians are.
He just canna forgive me
for not coming back
to you right away.
Nah, some of us like to think
before we act.
But you did come back,
and that's all that matters.
Then tell him that.
You know, in my America,
it's traditional
for the bride and groom
to feed one another
a little bit of wedding cake.
Oh, good.
I wish you'd told me first.
There was me thinking
that you were just trying
to shut me up for a minute.
But a wife should never dare
contradict her husband.
Oh, it's my turn.
Mm, wow.
Thank you.
And here we are, mistress.
The happy couple,
Mister and Mistress MacKenzie.
Congratulations.
Wed at last.
Thank you.
I wondered if your husband
would be so good
as to speak with me
in my pavilion before I leave.
Of course.
I look forward to it.
Enjoy the dancing.
Hmm.
Well, at least
your aunt likes me.
Well, you do look dashing.
As I'm sure you've told her.
She, for one,
can't see that I have cake
all over my face.
Maybe when we go back,
we can do all this again.
And I'll be
a little more prepared.
♪
My throat is drying out.
Who's next?
Aye, come on.
I slit a sheet...
A sleet I shit... no.
Who's next?
Come on, Morton.
Time waits for no man.
Peter Piper picked a peck
of pickled peppers.
- Sláinte!
♪
Oh!
Peter pecker
plucked a pluck of...
Forfeit.
Forfeit, come on.
Ah!
Ah, you would have
more luck in French, my love.
Ooh.
Peter Piper picked a peck
of pickled peppers.
Quickly, think of another,
Mistress Fraser.
- I don't...
- Else you'll face a forfeit.
- No, my mind is blank.
- Come on.
Oh, heavens... all right,
I'll go, all right!
Hmm.
'Tis mebbe a wee bit vulgar
for a lady.
May the lord forgive me.
There was an old pheasant,
and he's not too pleasant,
and though I'm not
a pheasant plucker... ooh...
I'll be plucking pheasants till
the pheasant plucking's done.
Um...
some Shakespeare, anyone?
What?
No.
Forfeit, please.
Up you go.
♪
Always exhausting, no matter
what century you're in.
A wise man once said,
"No one dances sober
unless he's insane."
Let's grab a drink.
- Mistress, might I...
- May you what?
- Of course, Lizzie.
- Oh, come on.
Should we teach Jemmy
how to do the mashed potato?
Or the twist?
Anyone watching you,
they'll think you've gone
stark raving mad.
Well, brides are allowed
to be crazy
on their wedding day.
You know,
it's not very easy
with this music,
but you know who I'd love
to see giving it a go?
I don't think
you'd get a mashed potato
out of your father.
Well, we'll see about that.
Good luck.
Willie's well, then?
Oh, he'd be dancing
with joy unconfined
if he were here.
There's never a dull moment,
or any rest,
where youth and pleasure meet.
And both fair youth and pleasure
are to be found in England
at the moment.
Ah.
I'm always glad
to hear your news, John.
And I endeavor to bring you
only glad tidings.
But in your letters,
you asked me to undertake
something for you.
Do you want one?
Do I need one?
I'm afraid I have
some shocking news.
There have been sightings
of Bonnet in the Province.
Bonnet.
I should have made certain.
I don't know why I didn't.
I assumed
he perished in the rubble.
That bastard has an ungodly way
of escapin' death.
Maybe hell's too good
for Stephen Bonnet,
and the devil wilna let him in.
♪
Well, did he put Elvis to shame?
Oh, couldn't find him.
You all right, darling?
Yeah.
Yeah, I was just thinking
it's a shame
cameras don't exist yet.
Well, it has been a day
to remember, Mrs. MacKenzie,
even if we don't
have any photographs.
You know, Daddy wouldn't
have been in them,
even if we were in our own time.
But Frank would have
been so proud of you.
And he would be delighted
that you're marrying
an Oxford man.
Well...
We used to joke,
living in Boston,
that you'd end up
with a Chad or a Chip.
Well, I have a Roger,
and a MacKenzie to boot.
♪
Which one of you lovely ladies
would like to cut a rug?
Ah, don't mind if I do.
♪
You missed a beautiful ceremony.
Aye.
But I did catch
a glimpse from afar.
Though... was that
a redcoat I saw?
Governor Tryon.
Hmm.
Then... what took you so long?
Well, I'm not in the habit
of traipsing out to a shed
to meet my acquaintances.
Who said it's a shed?
Perhaps I made
a hasty judgment,
being too generous.
The sound of twigs snappin'
and mud squelchin' underfoot,
well, it would suggest
something a wee bit rustic.
Well...
think of it as an enchanting
woodland palace
built by the kindly wood-nymphs
that live hereabouts.
What would that make you,
the Fairy King?
Your dispatches aren't
satisfactory any longer?
Tryon certainly isn't subtle
for a politician.
Aye.
When it comes to politics,
Sassenach,
there's not much
difference between
makin' the right friends
and the right enemies.
I'd rather keep Tryon
as a friend.
There's nothing we can do
about it tonight.
Let's get some sleep.
It won't be long
before we're woken
by the loud wailing
of a certain baby boy.
Hmm.
Loud wailings, huh?
Like father, like son.
Jamie.
Here.
Hush there, wee laddie.
Sit down.
♪ "L" is for the way ♪
♪ You look at me ♪
♪ "O" is for ♪
♪ The only one I see ♪
♪ "V" is very,
very extraordinary ♪
♪ "E" is even more
than anyone ♪
♪ That you adore can love ♪
♪ Is all that I can
give to you ♪
♪ Love is more
than just a game for two ♪
♪ Two in love can make it ♪
♪ Take my heart
and please don't break it ♪
♪ Love was meant
for me and you ♪♪♪
♪
Shh.
Where are we now,
in the cold light of day?
Hmm?
Yer mind's not here,
in this enchanted
woodland palace?
Aye.
In another lifetime,
you and I might have
had more time.
Perhaps if...
I was a different man...
But it's because
I ken what life is.
Ye canna change a man.
Ye can only change
his circumstance.
My circumstances may soon
be about to change.
Duncan Innes
has proposed marriage.
Innes?
Aye.
Ah...
Jamie and I, uh,
kent him from Ardsmuir.
I'd heard he'd settled
in North Carolina.
What did you say to him?
I have yet to give him
my answer.
I'll no' stand in the way
of yer happiness.
What kind of creatures
do ye hunt?
Uh, w-whatever I can find.
Uh, bear, beaver, and fox.
Hare, if ye can catch 'im.
You won't get much
for 'im, though.
Stag, buck, and doe.
Sure I'm borin' ye, Miss...
Lizzie.
Wemyss.
Josiah, the hunter.
Mr. Fraser, sir.
W-we was only talkin' of skin.
Of, uh, skins and pelts, I mean.
Next patient.
Aye, ye've a talent for huntin'.
Couldn't do better myself.
I was hopin'
you'd consider settling here,
on the Ridge.
Though perhaps I'd be unwise
to leave such a charming lad
among the women folk.
I've got more on my mind
than kissin'
and what have ye,
Mr. Fraser, sir.
M-my throat hurts bad.
These look healthy, Mistress.
Ah.
Mr. MacKenzie.
Choosing your breakfast,
Mistress Cameron?
Aye.
'Tis the cock that crows
but the hens that lay the eggs.
A married man ye are now,
come home to roost.
Will ye join me, Mr. MacKenzie?
Did my niece tell ye
that I meant
to make her heiress
to my property?
Aye, she did.
I'm sure, um, my wife
is most conscious of the honor,
Mistress Cameron, but, uh...
Is she?
I shouldn't have thought so,
to hear her talk.
Well, ye ken her mind
better than I do.
Be that is it may,
I mean to tell her
that I have changed my own mind.
Oh.
Well, I'm sure she'll...
I told Gerald Forbes
to draw up a will,
leaving River Run
and all its contents
to Jeremiah.
To... what, to wee Jemmy?
You'll doubtless ken
that a woman's property
becomes her husband's
once she's wed,
and I ken also that protestants
are partial to divorce.
I thought,
if you canna love the lad
for himself,
you might treat him well
for the sake of his prospects.
Are ye sayin' ye think
I don't believe
that he's my son?
I didna say as much.
Oh, you said a great deal.
And what ye've not said speaks
louder than what ye have.
How dare you
imply such things to me?
I offer you my apology,
Mr. MacKenzie.
But it is only to be understood
that a man might not
feel so kindly
towards a bairn his wife
has borne to another.
But if...
That's enough.
I may not have
any property or money,
but I have time.
And I will give it all
to Brianna and Jeremiah.
Let me put this very plainly.
I do not want your money.
My wife does not
want your money,
and my son will not have it.
Cram it up yer hole, aye?
As you hoped, Mistress?
Even better.
All right, head back.
Open your mouth wide.
Stick out your tongue.
Okay, say "ah."
Ah...
Mm. Abscessed tonsils.
I can remove them.
It'll hurt,
but it'll be better
in the long run.
Ye could do that?
Yes.
Though I wish I had different
medicine and equipment.
That's not it, is it?
'Cause if it is,
I'm feelin' better already.
No, don't worry.
And we don't have
to take them out now.
If Claire does this
for you, lad...
you'll settle at the Ridge?
Do the hunting when I'm away?
We'd be happy to help you.
Thank you.
That brand mark on his hand.
I'm guessing that "T"
stands for "thief"?
Well, who's not stolen
something in his time?
The lad's brought in a great
many deer and beaver skins.
Certainly doesn't sing
for his supper.
Hmm.
Yeah.
I'll leave you to yer patients
and to wage war with yer
wee invisible beasties.
Bacteria.
Certainly does feel like a war.
Then ye must find yerself
a lieutenant.
Right.
Next patient.
Yer Excellency.
Glad to see you up early,
Colonel Fraser.
Early bird and all that.
Still, I suppose it is a kind
of worm you will be catching.
I beg your pardon, sir?
Well, out of respect
for your daughter's wedding,
I deferred speaking of this
until today.
Your endeavors
to cultivate the King's land
have been admirable,
but the time has come
for you to fulfill your oath,
both to the crown and to me,
your benefactor.
Time for that hunt,
Colonel Fraser.
Gather your men.
I want Murtagh Fitzgibbons
and his insurgents
brought to justice.
Be it by rope or by ball,
it matters not one bit to me,
but I want his body
hanging in New Bern
as a warning to all.
This matter is beyond
the Province now.
The people are mindful
of the outcome.
Aye.
Mm.
Lieutenant Knox and his men
will remain to assist you.
I must show my face
to the local sheriffs,
reassure them
that their governor
is taking appropriate measures
to eradicate
this Regulator pestilence.
The indignities and insults
to his Majesty's government
must end.
Chose you for this task
because you know these Scots,
'cause you are one.
Do not disappoint me, Colonel.
We should prepare to leave
within a week.
Will that give you enough time
to put your affairs in order?
Aye.
Shh, shh, shh...
Yesterday was a celebration
of our love for one another.
But today,
and every day from now on,
it's us.
The three of us.
Aye.
Roger, what are you doing?
Something I should have done
a long time ago.
Jeremiah Alexander
Ian Fraser MacKenzie,
you are blood of my blood,
bone of my bone.
I claim thee as my son
before all men,
from this day forever.
Oh, where have you been?
What's the matter?
Tryon is leaving a troop
to aid me in the hunt.
We leave in a week.
And if you refuse
to hunt Murtagh,
then Tryon takes back our land?
He'll brand me a traitor.
I signed an oath to the crown.
Please.
Tryon would renege
on his oath to you
the moment it suited him,
or if he could profit from it.
Aye.
When this war you tell me about
eventually comes,
well, then,
I'll reconsider my vow,
but I dinna have the luxury
of that now.
Because of our family,
our tenants.
If there is a war,
I need to ensure the men
of the Ridge are loyal to me,
not to Tryon.
The men of the Ridge
would do anything for you.
Roger.
If I call up a militia,
he'll be expected to fight,
being fit and of age.
He's not ready for that.
Can't you keep him out of it?
Where are you going?
Tryon wants his Scot.
I'll give him a Scot.
♪
In the Highlands...
When a chieftain
sets himself to war,
he'll burn the fiery cross,
sending a sign throughout
the lands of his clan.
It was a call for his men to...
To gather their weapons,
come, prepared for battle.
We are friends, neighbors,
countrymen.
But we're not a clan.
I'm not yer chief.
But I hope
that if the time comes,
you will all
stand by my side.
We canna say
what might befall us.
But we must not only
be willing to make oaths
to our wives and loved ones,
but to our brothers in arms
in this new country.
Stand by my hand.
I will promise
to stand by your side,
Colonel Fraser, sir.
I swear,
by the cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and by the holy iron
that I hold...
What's happened?
Why are they giving
their oaths to Da now?
Since all the men are here,
your father thought
it would be wise
to prepare for the future.
If ever my hand turn
against you in rebellion,
I ask that this holy iron
pierce my heart.
Roger MacKenzie.
Be a shield for your family
and for mine.
Son of my house.
Captain...
Roger MacKenzie.
Captain?
Aye.
You'll be my safe by my side.
Repeat what I say.
I swear by the cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ...
And by the holy iron
that I hold,
to give ye my fealty,
and I pledge ye my loyalty.
If ever my hand be raised
against ye in rebellion,
I ask that this holy iron
pierce my heart.
I want ye to ken
that this act we're undertaking
forms a bond between us,
the founding of a kinship
in this New World.
Just as ye give me your word,
I give ye mine.
I will serve you,
as you are swearing
to serve me.
And I will not
light the cross again
until the time has come
for us to do battle.
Stand by my hand.
Fergus, son of my name
and of my heart.
♪
I swear...
by the cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and by this holy iron...
I give you my fealty.
♪
One last thing.
It's time.
Well, I suppose I should
take it as a compliment,
that he wants to display me
so prominently
at his palace in New Bern.
You've gotten under his skin
a wee bit.
Ye keep telling me,
ye ken how this will end.
This... this war
ye say is comin'.
But you can tell me
nothing of the Regulators,
how they fared in all of this.
No.
No, but if you wait...
We'll be fightin'
on the same side.
The war will change
the face of this land.
There's always a war comin'.
Hmm.
But it's for us to decide
which ones we fight.
What are you doing?
Fashioning a circle.
Perhaps you can ask those
that can travel to and fro
to go back and change things.
Make things here different.
Claire, Brianna, Roger.
They all came to this time
from another.
Because they did...
Ye have everything
ye've ever wanted.
I don't resent you for it.
But I must do what I must.
And ye cannot resent me
for that either.
Nothing could ever
make me resent ye.
Ghoistidh.
It's no longer safe
for you to remain here.
I know you stay
because of the vow
you made to my mother.
And to me.
Now...
I release you from it.
Go.
Please.
Be hard to find.
♪